Well, good afternoon.
Actually, I am not Steve Naroff.
For those of you who know me,
and for those of you who don't,
I'm Alan Samuel,
the Java Technology Manager in
Apple Worldwide Developer Relations.
So I think I'm in a very good mood today.
You guys probably all know why.
I actually get to stand up here and
hopefully tell you what you want to hear.
I'm one of those people who's
probably gotten a lot of emails
from you in the crowd asking me
when are we going to have Java 2?
And for the first time we're really
able to go out publicly and as you
saw today in the keynote give you what
you want and talk to you a little bit
about what we're doing with Java 2.
And before I bring up Steve,
I just want to go ahead and
Put a general thank you out to all the
engineers that work on Java at Apple.
I think these guys have
basically gone a long way.
We've come from a situation where
you could say in the MRJ land,
maybe we weren't doing as
good as we'd like to be.
And I think we are in a prime position
to be a leader in the Java platform.
And I think today's the day we start
to tell you all the information
that you need to make that happen.
So I want to give a little
hand to the entire Java team.
[Transcript missing]
I want to take a quick poll.
How many folks were here last year?
Quite a few.
At the Java talk, not only WWDC?
Okay, great.
You know where we've come from,
so I won't belabor it too much.
As Alan said,
the team has really come together,
not only the engineering team,
but the developer support team,
Alan and his folks,
that help a lot of you guys before we
get a chance to help a lot of you guys.
So I think all across the company we've
pulled together and made Java actually
pretty relevant in the Apple community,
and I think it's just going
to get better and better.
You saw in the keynote that we're going
to be offering Java 2 on Mac OS X.
It's a great fit.
The Mac OS X platform is a
great foundation for Java.
A lot of the modern components of
the operating system are components
that Java really depends on,
like the preemptive, multitasking,
protected memory, all that good stuff.
You've heard a lot of the
features in Bertrand's talk,
I'm sure.
I think most of you attended that.
Java was developed on Unix
in a modern operating system,
so again,
it benefits us as we move the technology
forward to be on a modern operating
system and have modern underpinnings.
The Java that we're going to be
shipping is Java 2 Standard Edition.
Later on I'll talk a little
bit more about what that means.
The Swing UI toolkit is built
into the Standard Edition,
if you aren't aware of that.
Swing is the modern GUI toolkit that
people use to write Java applications.
AWT was a smaller UI toolkit that
was used primarily for applets.
The two coexist right now in
the Java 2 Standard Edition.
We've done a lot to integrate with Aqua.
The demo that you saw on
stage with WebObjects,
that UI was a Swing application.
It was a pure Java Swing,
Java 2 Standard Edition application.
It wasn't Cocoa, for instance.
That user interface work was done
by a very talented person we have
working on our staff from Sun,
named Leanne Rucker.
I know she worked really
hard with the WebObjects team
to get that demo together.
and last and definitely not least,
we have the Hotspot Client VM.
This is an extremely robust
VM that in many cases is a second
or third generation technology.
The garbage collection technology
in it is state of the art.
The compiler in it is state of the art.
We'll go through some numbers later.
The team, Ivan Posva, Jim Lasky,
are our two leads on that project.
Just incredible results
with the Hotspot technology.
It was the type of decision that
we were contemplating last year.
I think we talked about that.
We were disappointed that
we couldn't tell you that we
were going to commit to it.
That's because we didn't know last year.
It's amazing how well that
technology has worked out for us.
Now we'll go through a brief timeline.
In February of '99,
right before last year's WWDC,
we shipped MRJ 2.1 GM.
And that was the first release of
Java that I think the team felt proud of.
We felt proud of it because
it performed fairly well.
It didn't exceed our expectations,
but I think met our
expectations in many ways.
But more importantly,
it ran a lot of applications.
And that's something that
MRJ 2.0 was not doing.
It was not running a lot of applications.
It was crashing and it was dying
and it just wasn't the type of
robust platform that we all wanted.
So 2.1 was a real breakthrough for us.
I think it delivered on the
strategy we outlined in '98.
and it's interesting because
when I stood up here in '98,
I was trying to think how could
I put in perspective for you guys.
I felt about four feet tall
when I stood up here in '98.
And last year I felt 5'7",
which is actually what I am.
And because we delivered on a strategy,
we still weren't happy
with where we were,
but we knew where we were going.
This year I feel 7' tall and
you can tell I'm not 7' tall,
but I feel that way.
And I feel that way because again,
I'm standing on the shoulders of
some really great people that make
it fun to come to work every day,
frankly.
Another part of the strategy
we delivered on is we wanted to
give you incremental releases that
fixed incremental bugs and solved
incremental performance problems.
So we did a release in March, May,
and July.
And that was another promise
that I think we've done a good
job delivering on or keeping,
was that we didn't want to
go dark for nine months.
And that was a problem before,
that we would just wait too long
before we'd show incremental progress.
So I thank the team for working
hard on those incremental releases.
And those are driven by emails, bugs,
customer requests.
I really feel that we do a pretty
good job trying to prioritize
what we're hearing from you and
building it into the product.
If not, you need to get a hold of our,
if there are features that you've
requested or bugs that you haven't
seen fixed throughout the dot
releases that we've released,
you just need to get a hold of Alan or
our developer support team and make
sure that feedback gets back to us.
So along with the 2.1.1.
1.3, we shipped 2.2 alpha.
and 214 was the last of
our 2.1 based releases.
The milestone there was we met
Oracle Bronze Certification.
We've been working really closely
with Oracle because they're a
very heavy Java user and they want
to make sure their applications
run really great on our platform.
We've, again, worked closely with them
to make that happen.
So in October, we released DP2.
That was our first Java 2-based VM.
So that's when,
even though we made no public statements
about where we're going with Java 2,
folks looked under the covers and
started figuring it out for themselves.
And we did a 2.2 beta.
And then in January, we went GM with 2.2.
2.2 was our, for lack of a better term,
IE 5.0 release.
We did fix bugs outside IE 5.0,
but it really was targeted at giving
the user or developer a better
experience within the scope of IE 5.0.
and then we did DP3,
which added the classes.
It was our first release.
There were still a lot of bugs in it.
Here we're at DP4, and the big addition
is the Hotspot client,
and many,
many bug fixes to the Java classes,
which we released in DP3.
That's been the progression.
It's been a lot of work.
We actually combined our Java 2
MRJ team with our Mac 10 Java team,
so now we're one Java team.
I think the productivity enhancements
we've gotten from even making that
change has been pretty dramatic.
Again, I'm thrilled with the last year.
I think a lot of people working on the
team look back and are probably startled
with how much we actually accomplished.
So before I go into the crux of the talk,
which is centered around Mac 10,
I'd like to briefly go over
our currently shipping product.
It's MRJ 2.2.
I believe the latest version,
minor version, is MRJ 2.2.1,
and it integrates with
the IE5 networking stack.
Cabinet File Support, Cookie Support,
Applicaching,
all these features you're probably aware
of if you've been using the product.
How many people are using 2.2 right now?
Okay, so you're familiar with it.
And we added along file name support.
So that's our Mac 9 product,
and we're going to continue to
enhance it along the 118 code base.
And now I'd like to go
into the crux of the talk,
which centers around
a three-mug strategy.
Cutesy.
So we have performance.
[Transcript missing]
So SpecJVM 98 is the benchmark
we're currently using.
You might remember in previous years,
we were using caffeine marks.
We decided, along with a lot of other
folks in the industry,
that caffeine marks are not a
great measure of performance.
So we decided to look for a
benchmark which would meet our needs,
and in fact came up with
the SpecJVM 98 benchmark.
These performance numbers I'm
going to show you are for DP4.
Just to be clear,
the numbers you're seeing
here are not seconds.
They're a score.
So it's a score that the
spec JVM benchmark gives you,
and higher is better,
as you might imagine.
And right here we have the orange,
which is basically the interpreter
running without the compiler.
So the classic Java Virtual Machine prior
to Hotspot was running at 1.8.
The interpreted Hotspot runs at 2.6,
which is roughly a 50% increase.
And you can see the
green is the compiler.
The compiler in both cases
runs roughly 10 times faster
than the interpreted code.
But what's much more important
and compelling than the 50%
boost we get is the amazing,
amazing reduction in memory.
Amazing reduction in memory.
Taking pages off disk is very costly.
It's clear that even though we've
upgraded most Macs with 64MB now,
asking people to have upwards to
128 and 256MB is not appropriate.
We want to find ways to
make Java programs run
in a sensible footprint.
So what this graph tells you is
it only costs 7MB to run this
benchmark in compiled mode.
And that 7MB not only includes
the compiled data structures,
but it includes the data structures
for the compiler itself to do its job.
And it's going to be, I think,
roughly 40-60, 50-50 split.
But in any event, from my perspective,
that's a reasonable price
to pay for compilation.
And if you do the math,
it's 4.5 times smaller.
And we've seen this translate
into not only our benchmarks,
but all the applications we're running
use far less memory than they used to.
So we're extremely excited about this.
It's only DP4.
We still have a lot of tweaking to do.
But we still feel fairly confident that
we're heading in the right direction.
The thing that...
Just briefly about adaptive
compilation technology,
the reason it's so much less is in
the semantic JIT world where you're
running in a classic virtual machine,
what the compiler tries to
do is compile everything.
That's its goal in life,
to try and make everything fast.
What happens with a hotspot adaptive
technology is it measures itself.
As the program's running,
it tries hard to only compile the
things that matter and not compile
the things that don't matter.
An obvious example of something that
doesn't matter is an initialized method.
There are obviously lots of
other methods that are used once,
twice, maybe used a lot for, let's say,
printing, but then printing gets swapped
out and you don't need it anymore.
The hotspot adaptive compilation
system is always measuring to make sure
that it's compiling the right stuff.
and SpecJVM is measuring.
It's basically a suite of applications.
I think it's six altogether.
Database, the Java compiler.
I think our Java compiler is two to three
times faster now as a result of Hotspot.
There's a compiler compiler
for Purdue in there.
There's data compression,
an expert system shell,
and MPEG audio decompression.
So you can see these are applications
that most of you have probably heard of.
Certainly you know Java.
The Java compiler,
you've heard of database,
you've heard of compiler compilers,
data compression.
All this stuff is stuff that benefits
real world applications that are
being used out in the Java community.
So what do we have left?
Hotspot tuning.
This is our first release.
Even though we're happy,
we still have a ways to go.
Graphics Tuning.
Especially AWT,
there's still some issues with how
we integrate with Quartz and the
windowing system that we need to
resolve before we're really happy
with our AWT graphics performance.
We're fairly happy with
the swing performance,
and you'll see a demo later that
I think will show you that we're
in pretty good shape with swing,
yet we still have some work to do there.
This is a feature which I've
been persistent about for years,
and I think we're finally getting
to the point we're going to have it,
I believe, hopefully by GM,
is the ability to run multiple
Java applications and share
a lot of its metadata.
It turns out that if you
look at a class file,
the instruction stream is only a small
part of what makes up a .class file.
There's an awful lot
of metadata in there,
and if you don't share that metadata
across invocations of a Java VM,
then you could end up eating
lots and lots of memory,
especially for something like Swing.
It's a fairly large UI toolkit.
So, again,
imagine running five Java applications.
You want them to share
as much data as possible,
again, to get the footprint down.
And last and not least, launch time.
We're very adamant that applications have
to launch in a fairly sensible timeframe,
where sensible is between
one and five seconds.
And we have some very large
Java apps we're running now that
take about ten seconds on Mac OS X.
And again, we'll show you that.
We hope to get that down to five seconds.
But it's certainly a long
way from where we've come,
where some Java applications on MRJ on
Mac 9 could take as much as 30 seconds,
30, 40, 50 seconds.
Here's a quick pointer.
Three incredibly talented people,
two in the VM space,
and one graphics nut, John Berkey.
Why does it say Jim Berkey?
Did I say Jim?
[Transcript missing]
Compatibility.
This section of the talk
is mostly Sun stuff,
but I still think it's
important to review with you.
If you haven't kept up
with the Java lingo,
when they went to Java 2,
they defined a whole new process,
they defined a whole new set of terms,
and so on.
And a lot of that was actually good,
but it takes some getting used to.
And standard edition is called J2SE,
that's the acronym that
a lot of people use.
There's a micro edition,
and there's an enterprise edition.
Right now, we're focusing on the orange,
which is the standard edition.
I think it might be
better termed desktop,
so that's why I put that up.
The micro edition is probably
better termed embedded,
and you can think of the
enterprise edition as the server.
So since desktop is our focus at Apple,
we want to be great on the desktop,
and then potentially worry about
some of the other editions.
Web objects, for instance,
might take some components from J2EE,
like Java beans,
but might not support the
whole stack in its entirety.
Those are decisions that
we have yet to make.
So, key features.
Swing interface objects,
I guess one of the more compelling
features of Swing is it supports
multiple platform look and feels,
and we'll get into that later.
Java 2D, advanced graphics support.
The Java 2D API is actually
very similar and supports a
similar feature set to Quartz.
And, in fact,
our implementation on Mac 10
relies heavily on Quartz.
There's new collection classes.
Drag and drop is a feature that
I believe we have in our MRJ.
We put that in as a stopgap.
It was modeled after the Java 2 support,
so now we're just relying on the standard
drag and drop that Java 2 supports.
We have print support and improved
font and international text.
There's a very fancy
policy-based security mechanism.
There's Corva support.
For those who are unfamiliar with Corva,
Corva is a way for other
languages and other processes
to talk to Java and vice versa.
Many people are using that
technology in the enterprise.
A really cool feature of Java 2 is
they've really taken each subcomponent
of the VM and made some nice APIs to it.
For instance, there's a JNI.h JVM.
These are all interfaces which,
if you wanted to plug your own
VM into our implementation,
you could.
I don't anticipate that most of
you are going to go to the trouble
of implementing your own VM,
but some of you may plug into the
debugger or the profile interface.
That enables you to basically write
GUI-based tools atop our VM for
profiling and debugging and so on.
For instance,
those are the APIs that MetroWorks,
CodeWarrior, Project Builder,
and so on and so forth use.
Sound support.
and a ton of other stuff.
It's huge.
Talking about that.
1.1.8 is a set of 23 packages,
about 5,000 members.
Java 2 Standard Edition is
a huge platform.
It offers a ton of functionality.
We went through this last year,
people who were here.
It contains about three times more APIs.
Now, whenever you do that big a
release where you've expanded the
API surface area by three times and
you've made all kinds of changes,
you're undoubtedly going to break people.
That's one of the concerns that
people had in the Java community
is as they take their 1.1 apps,
it can be challenging to find
the compatibility differences,
particularly in the AWT area.
This is an issue that
we're working on with Sun.
All the licensees are
working on with Sun.
I don't think Sun will
ever make that big a leap.
That is,
add three times more APIs at one step.
I think they've learned their lesson,
so to speak,
and the releases that will be
coming out now will be more
of an incremental fashion.
Again, it's just more sensible to
incrementally release these
APIs rather than go to 3X overnight.
As a result,
mission-critical applications
have been slow to move.
There's a very good 15-page
document on the web.
If you're interested and concerned
about moving your 1.1 code to 2.0,
reference this document.
It has a ton of great information
on what the source level,
binary, and other types of changes that
you're likely to encounter.
And in general, new Java applications are
targeting the Java 2 platform.
Applets aren't being written
to Java 2 in general.
So we test our Java product
with something called the JCK,
the Java Conformance Kit or
Compliance Kit from Sun.
And we're obligated as
licensees to pass it.
But what's much more compelling to me is
how many real world applications we run.
So for instance,
Oracle has 40,000 test suites.
We currently pass their tests as
well and are continuing to work with
them on passing even more tests.
Charles Schwab has this
really cool trading app.
It was advertised in this guy over here.
It's called Velocity.
Anyway.
But it's our first example of
a shrink-wrapped Java app that
actually people are using day to day,
in this case for trading stocks,
a pretty mission critical thing,
if that's what you want to do.
And it's...
That's worked incredibly well.
We're extremely happy with the
reliability of that product as well,
and they've been great to work with.
And SAP is another company we're
working closely with to make sure
their enterprise applications
are working really well.
We're getting a lot of testing,
and it's really neat to see how
relevant actually this Java technology
has become in the enterprise space.
So with that in mind,
I'd like to bring up someone from Oracle.
His name is Peter Heller.
Thanks, Peter.
Okay.
Our apps, this is, excuse me,
there's actually just one great word,
which is finally.
We've been working,
I've been working with Apple on
trying to get our apps running on
their Mac platform and a variety
of hardware OSs in the past for,
I think, three or four years.
So we've finally actually
been able to achieve this
with the most recent release.
If you don't know Oracle apps,
Oracle apps are basically
mission critical enterprise
apps dealing with financials and
manufacturing and CRM applications,
call centers, sales force automation,
all these different things.
There are 70 in total.
And our co-markets really are
the university market and a
lot of creative services firms,
people that are, obviously have Mac as
a dedicated platform.
And they also want to run
their standard business apps.
They don't want to have to have
them sit side by side with PCs.
So we have actually, I think easily,
a hundred million dollars of potential
revenue that we could probably earn,
we will probably earn as we
move forward into this space.
So that's a great
opportunity for you as well.
What I thought I'd do is just show
you a little bit about our apps.
If we can switch to the system.
This is,
these apps are built with Oracle's Jade,
with Oracle's developer tool,
which is a 4GL style tool and
it runs now on the Mac platform.
So what we're looking at here is,
this is just going to be a
quick general ledger example,
but basically what we have
is a process flow navigator.
So users as they want to do transactions,
whether it's purchasing or general ledger
or manufacturing or billing or whatever,
they have a kind of a map that
they can walk through as they
go through the transactions.
So one of the things
that we can do here is,
for instance, let's say we were going
to reclassify our revenue.
As we move through these maps,
you get a little green line.
You can see that we have a map that says,
"I'm going to go through this.
I'm going to go through this." And then
you can see that we have a map that says,
"I'm
The App comes up relatively quickly.
I guess I should also
mention the environment here.
All we've got here running
is Internet Explorer with
the standard Apple MRJ,
and all of our apps and everything is
across the network at Oracle Corporate.
What we have here is basically
a way to look at information.
For all our journal entries,
we can resize some columns,
we can add and subtract some things.
Let's just quickly do a
journal entry to show you.
I want you to see part of the modified
or enhanced AWT is you see the whole
screen just pop at once because all
the objects are being laid down in
memory before they're being displayed.
So what we can do is we can
do a quick transaction here.
If I can type without my fingers here.
So we can kind of go down here.
One of the characteristics of
a Java app for us is what we
call high volume productivity.
One of the key elements-- we have two
product strategies or design points,
if you will, for our apps.
We have what we call a
self-service design point,
which is generally characterized as HTML,
easy to use, single click,
that kind of thing.
We're all familiar with it.
And placed in the hands of
completely untrained users.
The other audience,
what we would call the
professional clerk,
is somebody that actually
demands high productivity apps.
They're sitting down.
Their whole job is doing nothing
but keying in data all day long.
And what they have-- some of
their requirements are things
that only Java can handle.
Things like type ahead.
Things like when you're
looking for a list of values,
the windows pop up in the
context of the screen.
Having keyboard equivalents.
There's actually a
large number of things,
as you probably have
made choices yourself,
about what's good for
Java versus what's good for HTML.
And of course,
we have Java embedded in HTML as well.
But these are the core,
what we would call,
heads down administrative apps.
So you get certain kinds
of dialogues popping up.
And all sorts of keyboard
equivalents here.
I'll just show you some of our UI here.
What we're going to do is--
We're going to move product
revenue from-- let's see here.
I have to find my accounts here.
[Transcript missing]
from unearned revenue,
we're going to go to
miscellaneous revenue,
and we just so happen--oops,
an error message there.
Product X, which means Mac 10.
So we're going to go with that,
and we're going to put in
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
So basically we do a transaction.
We interact with it a little bit.
We go ahead and post the transaction.
Oh, tells me it did it.
and it gives me a tracking number and
basically the transaction is done.
That's kind of an interactive
experience for a production user.
What I can do now is just show you as
we go down through the process map.
What we want to do is as we go through
the process and post the journals,
then you end up seeing the
continuousness of the process.
It's a great way to write apps,
and it's a great way to
build them modularly,
and based on different kinds of
control points that businesses need,
this is a really nice user
interface to break up big apps into
functional components and do stuff.
That's just the marketing
of our own products.
Basically, that's what I wanted to show,
which is our developer product.
This product actually is the
development tool for roughly 7,000 of
these products that cover 70 modules.
It's a very big app,
and it's Oracle's premier application.
Thanks, Steve.
Thanks a lot.
Okay.
So I know there are
folks out there saying,
"Well, that doesn't look like a Macintosh
UI." That's not the idea.
The idea for Oracle is--and
people could argue with this,
but at least it's their
goal to have a branded UI,
and for them to have a UI that works the
same across multiple operating systems.
And in fact,
Oracle spends quite a bit of time
making sure their app does have
the Oracle branded look and feel.
So that's, in a nutshell,
why it looks different.
And again,
that's one of the goals of the platform,
the Java 2 UI toolkit,
is to allow you to have the
branded UI if that's what you want.
So I don't know how many
of you folks caught it,
but there was a release, press release,
April 14th,
that talks about Sun working closely
with some Blue Ribbon vendors.
Fortunately, Apple was one of them.
There's been a lot of frustration
in the Java community,
some of you are probably aware of this,
with Sun's attempt, or lack thereof,
to standardize Java.
There was an ANSI attempt,
there was an ECMA attempt,
and now the third pitch, so to speak,
is this new JCP 2.0.
And we've been working closely with them
to make sure this is a sensible process,
which will benefit Apple,
as well as the other companies,
and actually as well as individuals who
might want to get their say in as well.
So I think this process is
actually looking pretty good,
and it's still evolving.
But the good news is we're at the table.
The other press release,
as far as Java compatibility
is concerned,
is they just released 1.3,
which is the hotspot client
VM that actually we're shipping.
It's the same hotspot client
VM we're shipping in DP4,
but we haven't integrated
all the 1.3 stuff yet.
So the release that you're getting
is based on somewhere in the
middle between 1.2.2 and 1.3.
But by the time we go GM,
we will upgrade to 1.3 entirely,
which is the current shipping standard.
We currently pass 96% of the JCK tests,
I'm told, for a beta product.
I'm pretty happy with that,
so we have 4% left that we'll
nail by the time we go GM.
and Sun really did listen
to their customers for 1.3.
Again, they got a little bit burned
by the big gulp they asked
everyone to take with 1.2,
and 1.3 is almost entirely
performance and compatibility focused.
It has almost no new features
and has about the same footprint
as the previous version.
So another demo.
The first demo might have been obvious,
but again,
it's MRJ 2.2 running on a Mac 9 platform.
The demo I want to give
now is ask Blake Stone,
an incredibly talented
engineer from InPrize,
to come up and give a
demo on Java 2 on 10.
Thanks, Dave.
Before we launch into this,
I have to clarify a few things.
We're going to be showcasing some
fairly interesting technology here.
At this point, it is a technology demo.
We're obviously working with early
technology from Apple in the form of DP4.
We're working with technology of our own.
But we haven't announced
any products at this point,
so I'd like to remind people of
that before things get too excited.
But it is interesting to
note what we've been doing.
What we've been doing is we've
been working with a partner
who is extremely interested in
building a premier Java 2 platform,
in building technology that makes
Java developers sit up and take notice.
So that attracts our attention.
After all,
we have some absolute world-beating
products in that area as well,
and so there's some natural synergy.
And we thought this is an opportunity
to see how they work with partners
and how that process might work out.
And to be honest, it's been exceptional.
I've been very responsive to
our need to work with partners.
And I've been very interested
in working with them.
our need for performance tweaks,
our need for fixes in some areas.
In fact, just the last session
I was in with John Berkey,
I saw him in the row ahead of me,
busy trying to tweak a few last things
to make the product even faster.
I'm not going to take the chance and
run with those fixes here on stage,
but just so you know,
that kind of thing is ongoing,
we're getting better
and better performance.
So what is it that I'm talking about?
Of course,
what I'm talking about is JBuilder.
So if we can switch to
the machine over here.
and bring it up.
I'd like to have a look at a product
that consists of about 5,000 classes.
So you saw the statistics
on Java 2 itself.
This is enormous.
In terms of code bulk,
our product is actually larger
than the JDK in terms of the
amount of Java code involved.
So will it run on this new
platform in a preview stage?
Well, we'll hope so.
This is a demo after all.
We'll see just how far we can get.
But I'd like to showcase some of what
you can do with a pure Java application.
For those of you who aren't familiar,
JBuilder is a Java development IDE.
And as such, it has a lot of what
you'd normally expect,
the ability to create
and manipulate projects,
edit code, and so forth.
And I'm going to start with a new
project and just bring up some of the
wizards that we have for manipulating
projects in our environment.
Let the system swap itself back in.
This is always the way I like
demonstrations to begin.
We'll see if this doesn't
behave well for us,
we'll restart the product.
Of course, this all went incredibly
well in rehearsals.
So some of what was being talked
about earlier is the launch
performance for Java applications.
So we'll get an ideal opportunity
to demonstrate that here.
Launch performance for
a Java application,
of course, is critical.
And a lot of what we're seeing is
a very expensive startup process in
terms of loading the imaging and so
forth at the basic class libraries.
But really, the launch time for
the product is not bad.
It's actually faster than a lot of
native applications on the platform,
which has got us quite gratified.
So from there,
we're going to go ahead and
start off with our new project.
So we built a new project here.
Within that project,
I'm going to request that we go
ahead and build an application.
And it will give us a couple of the
sort of basic application starting
point and a frame and bring us into
the editor in this environment.
What's interesting here to note is that
we're running a pure Java application.
The editor isn't some piece of
native code in the environment.
The editor is actually
written in Java code.
And as such, you'd expect it to exhibit
performance problems.
But in practice,
things like syntax highlighting,
noticing with a keystroke that
the contents is changed into
a comment is incredibly quick.
The ability of the environment
to keep up with structural
changes is quite amazing as well.
What you're seeing on the left-hand
side here is a structure pane
showing me the structure of my file.
But I have a single class with
a number of elements declared.
If I were to go in and declare
a new structure element,
it just shows up in a list.
So we're parsing behind the scenes
to try to give us the information.
So we can see the information about
what is in our particular file here.
And we can browse
We're also getting additional information
on the fly because we're parsing
the Java code in the background.
If I make a mistake in my
code and just keep working,
it'll notify me by showcasing that
there are errors in my code and allow
me to go directly to that line of
code so I can fix my error on the fly.
So we're not waiting for compile
time to catch that kind of thing.
It's an extraordinarily
productive environment.
So I like to start with that as
a starting point and go ahead
and try to build something.
But of course,
when you're building something,
what you'd really like to be
able to do is use a visual
layout to work with Java Bean.
So I'm going to move over
to the designer here.
And in the design environment,
we have the ability to place Java Beans.
I'm going to use swing components.
After all, they are more or less
standard Java Beans,
and they'll allow me to
prototype a UI fairly rapidly.
For those of you coming from
an environment where I hear
lots of concerns about layouts,
is there enough space on my
layout to accommodate this change?
Well, if you're a Java developer,
you know that there's some
extremely sophisticated technology
for dealing with layouts,
but it can be quite difficult to learn.
So it's easiest to start in
sort of a raw positioning,
an XY layout mode.
I'm going to go ahead and use
XY layout to place a scrolling region.
and within that scrolling region
and go ahead and drop back a list
and i want to drop in couple buttons
and I want to drop in a text field.
And then we'll go ahead
and write some code.
What's interesting is that I have
been writing code all along.
Everything I do in here,
every time I drop a component,
every time I edit something,
it's writing Java source code.
So you can see behind the scenes that
it's written source code here to set
the text on the buttons and so forth.
What's unique about our approach is
that we don't deal with this as a
code generation or one-way technology.
We don't block this
off from your editing.
We treat this as a fully two-way tool
where I can go ahead and modify my source
code and then drop back into design
mode and you'll see that those changes
are reflected immediately in my design.
It's actually parsing
and executing the source.
So we'll make a few more
adjustments to my layout here.
And once I've got the layout
more or less the way I want it,
of course,
this gives me absolute positioning,
which when I scale things or change
the text on buttons isn't going
to work for internationalization.
So I'd like to change
it to a grid bag layout.
So what do I need to do?
I need to tell it to change
to a grid bag layout.
And what's happened is behind the scenes,
it's figured out the optimal grid bag
layout to use for that positioning.
So as I internationalize this,
excuse my internationalization,
we'll see the automatic
adjustments that are taking place.
So I've got the basic layout in place,
and I'd like to go and add a little
bit of code behind the scenes.
And, of course,
we can just wire events up.
I'd like to go ahead
and wire up an add item.
And immediately I discover
I want to add an item to a list.
Swing lists are a little awkward.
You need a model.
You need to wire up the model,
and so forth.
That's fine.
This is fully two-way.
We can drop back into our
designer and pick up a swing
model using our class browser.
You'll notice that our class browser
knows about comApple classes.
It's because it's dynamically
discovering from the class path
what classes are available.
So if you add third party classes or
switch to a different version of the VM,
we'll automatically adapt to
that additional technology.
But let's go in right now
and pick up the JavaX swing.
And I'm going to use
the default list model,
if I can find it.
and so I'm going to drop a
default list model in place,
take my JList and wire the model up,
and now I've established a relationship
between those two and I can do
something interesting in code with them.
What I'd like to do in code is go ahead
and add something to that list model.
Do I remember the name of the list model?
No, heavens.
It's a list,
default list model something.
So I'm going to invoke Code Insight,
which is a technology that,
from within this context,
tells me here are the things
I can legally refer to.
In this case it knows about
default list model one because
within this scope it's visible.
So, okay,
I want to use default list model one.
What do I want to do with it?
Well,
now it's reevaluated that scope and said,
here are the available methods.
And there is, in fact,
something called add element.
And for add element,
it's gone and checked and there's
only one overloading of that method.
It takes one parameter of type
object and it's even gone to the
source code for that method to
find the name of the parameter,
obj.
And it's kind of convenient.
So we'll go through and
pick up the jtext field,
this jtext field one.
And again,
use Code Insight to find get text.
It takes either no parameters
or an offset in the length,
but that sounds fine to me.
We'll go to the next step,
which is that I want to wire up
the delete button to go ahead
and delete the selected item.
Okay.
So it looks vaguely similar,
but what I really need to do
is I need to find out the,
the position of the selected item.
And I can do this from the list.
There's a get selected index.
But what does that return
if there's no selection?
Well, if I can't remember offhand,
I can simply select with a single
keystroke that I'd like to go and
find the declaration for that method.
It found the source code
where I can see the Java doc,
see offhand that it returns negative
one if there's no selected item,
and just use the browser style
controls to navigate back to where
I was writing my source code.
[Transcript missing]
So this database,
we can see how much object allocation
is working within the file.
We can see a bunch of the tables
that are available within the tables.
We can see indexes and so forth.
So we have this full
management interface.
Again, the management interface itself,
of course, is written in Java.
So we've got a database to connect to.
Let's go ahead and use an existing
connection to this JDataStore database.
Test that connection to make sure, again,
the database is up and running
and that we can connect to
it without any problems.
Probably shut the database down helpfully
by quitting that prior application.
And then go ahead and
connect a query to it.
And so we have a nice little
component that represents a query.
Let's see.
Hang on.
and connect the query to
our existing database,
use our built-in SQL builder to
go and find a table within that,
grab all of the columns from the table.
We can see the SQLs that it's
automatically generated on our behalf,
and we have a query.
Fine, but we need to connect
that to visual information.
That's fine.
We have components for that as well.
I'm actually going to
just use border layout
: I'm going to do my work here.
Drop a scrolling region and a table,
and how much code have I written so far?
Well,
I can connect to this database and get
live data at design time and at runtime
without writing a single line of code.
And we'll take that a step further,
drop in a
and the navigation interface as well,
and connect those both
to the same data set.
So now I have an application that I'm
going to go ahead and compile and run.
And I'm going
will go ahead and connect to the database
and see what Xero code can do in terms
of database connectivity with Java.
: Excuse me, launch time again.
It takes a moment for it to
come up and actually connect to
the database in the background.
But what we'll have here is a UI that
allows me to view that information,
manipulate information,
navigate through it, et cetera.
So we can navigate.
We can, of course, resize columns.
We can reorder columns.
If I want to change the
name of somebody here,
I can change it.
We can see in the status
area that I am editing a row.
Normally the status area
shows us what record we're on.
We can commit those changes
back to the database,
all without writing a
single line of code.
So that's fine.
That's dandy.
What we've got is the ability to
be extremely productive at dealing
with Java code in this environment,
but you wouldn't have much
of a full-featured IDE if
you didn't have a debugger.
So I'd like to take a
quick tour of the debugger,
if we're doing okay on time here.
I have no idea, to be honest.
Basically,
I'd like to bring up a basic application,
place a breakpoint in it,
and we'll go in and launch the debugger.
Our little application here
performs some basic console UI.
In this case,
it's going to prompt me for my name
before hitting that breakpoint,
and then stops when it
hits the breakpoint,
of course.
At that point, I'd like to be able to see
the context that I'm in.
So I can see that I am stopped
at a thread called main
in the main thread group,
which is in the system thread group,
and that there are two stack frames here.
I called from the main
method into the go method,
and I can see in the go method
that I can see the this reference,
drill down into that,
see the class that it belongs to,
any of that class's parent
classes and static members.
I can see other variables in context,
like this first, what have you.
We have some interesting convenience
functionality for allowing you to
manipulate information as well.
I can actually go and change values on
the fly in an application I'm debugging.
For example, if I see that I'm in
the main thread group,
and I step past this
line that prints my name,
I could go and even change a string
value on the fly and say the new string
value... I got focus in the wrong place
Of course,
we are running on beta software.
Please expect a few quirks along the way.
So we can change string values,
integer values within the debugger.
We can also do things that are
quite unusual for a debugger,
like create a field breakpoint.
What's a field breakpoint?
It's going to tell me every time it tries
to reference this particular variable.
So I'm going to continue
my execution here,
and we'll see that it has stopped
automatically at this line,
which is referring to name,
and given me the message,
"Stopped at breakpoint reading
debug me name." In fact,
we can go and select for that
field breakpoint individually,
whether it should break on
reads of that variable or break
on writes of that variable.
So an enormous amount of flexibility.
I'd like to do one last look,
because Java takes a serious
look at what it takes to do
multi-threaded applications.
There's language support built
right in for multi-threading.
So what happens when we go to
debug a multi-threaded application?
Well,
it adds a whole new set of problems,
because we need to be able to keep
track of what locks are being acquired.
In this case,
I'm acquiring two locks on a thread,
and our debugger will actually
show you the monitors.
It'll show you what the
object is that's locked,
and what thread is locking it.
And as I proceed a little further
here and get three threads,
we can see situations where this
object is owned by one thread,
there's another thread waiting on it,
so that we can see situations
where we're getting multiple
threads cooperating here,
and go a step further to
situations where our entire
application has locked up on us.
And by pausing it,
we can see that it's highlighted these
two as the cause of the deadlock that
is currently active in my system.
I can tell we're running
a little low on time here,
I suspect.
But I would like to take this
time to really point out that
what we've taken here is,
again,
an enormous Java application and brought
it over to the Mac OS X platform.
And while it would be natural to say,
what kind of porting work
did you do to bring it here,
the porting work we've done is
working with Apple to tell them
what issues we've run into in terms
of compatibility with their VM.
Not a single line of code has
changed from our shipping product.
This is the product you can purchase
today on a number of other platforms.
So that's really exciting
from our perspective.
We're looking forward to moving a
little further with this technology.
Incredible.
Thank you.
Well, that demo blows me away.
You guys were a little quiet.
Didn't it blow you away, too?
Again, it's the best way for me to show
you how real Java 2 is on Mac 10.
This thing is a torture
test for the Java VM.
I think Sun uses it internally
to make sure their stuff runs
every time they make a change.
Again, it's not a shipping product.
It's not perfect yet,
but considering how much work
was done on Enprise's part,
it's just incredible how far we are.
The person on our end who actually
helped get it to this point and
really owned this is John Berkey.
John, could you stand up for a second?
In fact, last year at WWDC when
I got off the stage,
Blake introduced himself and told me
they were doing this work and asked
if we were going to have Java 2.
And I said, "Yes,
we're working on it." And then
went back to the shop and just
informally said to the folks,
"We have to make sure this stuff
works for next WWDC." And to see it
working now again is really great.
At that time, it wasn't even a product.
You would come and show
me the product later on.
And actually, I gave Avi a demo as well
because it was the first large,
pure Java application we had seen
running on Windows at the time that
looked like a great application.
It wasn't slow.
It didn't look funny,
and so on and so forth.
Whereas a lot of the other IDEs and
products in the Java space were
typically not of the fit and finish
that we typically expect at Apple.
Let me find my beeper.
I think it's in my pocket.
The last part of the talk,
we have 15 minutes left.
And because this is an overview talk,
we're advised not to do Q&A.
So I don't think we're going to
have any time to do Q&A today.
So I urge any of you,
if you have any questions on this stuff,
either go see the other talks about
Java or come to our feedback forum,
which we'll talk about later.
So now I'd like to talk
about the third mug.
which is integration.
by far this is the most important
thing we're doing at Apple is
integrating this in a sensible
integrating Java in a sensible way.
What does that mean?
From my perspective,
Windows deployment is totally
busted now because again,
Sun has made this big leap.
They went from 1.1.8 to
a 2.6 megabyte footprint,
that's what those numbers say,
to a 19.2 megabyte installed
footprint with 1.2.2.
Microsoft doesn't bundle this.
We are going to be bundling this,
so anyone who writes to the Java 2
platform gets to depend on it,
on our platform.
They don't have to lug it around
like they have to on Windows.
To give you a sense for what
20 megabytes installed is like,
I decided I'd measure Carbon.
Carbon weighs in at about
11 megabytes on DP4.
You know, since you're a Mac developer,
what Carbon is about.
Imagine two times that,
which is again what the installed
footprint is on Windows.
But the installed footprint
is only one side of the story.
I think the most important side of the
story is Java was not designed with
a static deployment model in mind.
Just think,
if you're an application and you're
carrying around this Java runtime
environment that's 20 megabytes,
and it's just a part of yourself,
so to speak, why are you paying for
the interpretation?
Why are you paying for
the class verification?
Why are you paying for interpreting?
There's just so much stuff you pay for
because Java is a great systems model,
system language and VM model that
carrying it around makes no sense
from a time perspective either.
So both from a time and
a space perspective,
what people are doing on
Windows is nonsensical.
Sun will solve this problem, I believe,
even in spite of Microsoft,
but it's solved today on our platform.
So Oracle can go to their customers
when they move to Java 2 and not have
to carry around another 20 megabyte jar
file every time they open a connection,
for instance.
So I think it's pretty critical
that we're bundling this stuff,
we're tightly integrating it,
and we're going to make sure
the footprint is very low.
As I think most of you are aware,
we really like the Java language
and virtual machine.
Again, it's a great model.
It's a great systems model.
C++ drifted away from many application
uses at the system layer because it
wasn't a great system-level object model.
It's a fine object model,
but it just isn't appropriate
for systems development,
and that's one of the reasons Java's
taken off technically as much as it has.
It's very appropriate for
a system object model.
Just to further explain
what I mean by that,
I'm sure some of you are aware with
the fragile base class problem,
I guess is one common
way of referring to it.
Basically, the ABI that a compiler
uses is in the C++ world,
typically proprietary and
owned by the compiler.
Java VM specifies how all .class
files are to be interpreted.
This is a huge interoperability win.
It means you can... migrate to new
instances of the VM fairly painlessly.
We have the Java 2
Standard Edition packages.
But here's where we innovate.
We have WebObjects.
And as you heard today,
we're going to a pure
Java version of WebObjects,
but even right now it's all wrapped
today so that you don't even
know it's written in Objective-C,
even though it is.
Cocoa is written in Objective-C.
We wrapped that as well,
but it's totally accessible from Java.
And QuickTime is also
accessible from Java.
All three of these technologies
are incredibly important to Apple.
And sitting atop is Project Builder
and Interface Builder.
Let's take the tools first.
I just want to show you a screenshot of
something I think you saw in the keynote.
Avi brought it up briefly.
We have totally rewritten what
Next used to call Project Builder.
Rather than rename it,
we kept the name but
rewrote the entire product.
We figured most folks in
the Apple community weren't
familiar with Project Builder,
so the name was sensible.
We kept the name and
rewrote the whole product.
What you're seeing here is a sketch,
which is on the system.
You can go look at it.
It's a Cocoa Objective-C program.
It's a little bit silly.
We still have yellow
in the package names,
but they'll be renamed appropriately
before we go final with this.
Right there you can see with
Project Builder we're going more for,
I guess some people refer
to it as user centered,
some people refer to it
as document centered,
but that editor/viewer is used to
viewer edit multiple data types.
In the keynote I think you
saw a fancy diagram in there.
In this case you can see
there are release notes,
which is an RTF file, that's a TIFF file,
and that's a Java file,
all from the same context.
You're not switching
to and from many apps.
Project Builder is a tool
which at DP4 fully supports C,
C++, ANSI C obviously,
and supports a lot of our frameworks.
Java development is just coming online.
It works fairly well,
but for GM it's going
to work a lot better.
If you care about it,
go see the Project Builder talks.
Another important thing to
mention about Project Builder.
You just saw the great enterprise
development environment.
One of the big differences between
Project Builder and JBuilder is JBuilder
is pretty much a single language,
single framework development environment.
It's targeting Java 2.
What Project Builder is,
is a multi-language,
multi-framework development environment.
Again, it supports the C-based languages
along with Java and is going to
be supporting AppleScript as well.
There are some demonstrations on that.
There are trade-offs you make in a
multi-lingual environment that you
don't have to make in a single language,
single framework environment.
I believe both actually have different
markets and I hope to see both
of them thrive in our community.
WebObjects, they're giving their
State of the Union right now.
I snarfed a couple of their slides.
Fortunately, they're going at the same
time because this was going to
steal some of their thunder.
Powerful,
I'm sure you're familiar with it.
We use it internally pretty extensively.
We run our whole Apple store on it.
and here are some of the features.
So one thing that's important
to note with WebObjects,
again, we use it.
There are many,
many customers who are using it, Disney,
MCI.
Just Steve showed the whole
list of them at the keynote.
It's technology which is very mature.
It's been around for a while.
And it integrates not only with Java now,
but with QuickTime for Java,
as you saw in the keynote.
We've won many awards.
The most recent one, I believe,
is we won the CODI in March.
It's critically acclaimed.
5.0.
The big thing with 5.0 is
it's going to pure Java.
Right now,
it depends on the Objective-C runtime
for its deployment.
The benefit of going pure Java is
WebObjects can benefit from all the
other Java VMs that are being done at HP,
at Sun, and so on,
just as we're investing in Java.
It means we don't have to deploy
some of the Objective-C technology
on some of the servers.
and it uses JDBC.
I don't know when 5.0
is going to be released.
I guess I shouldn't say.
In the future.
Quick time for Java.
I won't go into it,
except there's a beautiful
book that's been written.
I don't have a copy,
and I couldn't get a screenshot of it,
but I urge you to take a look at Stacy's
or wherever you buy your computer books.
There's a great book
on QuickTime for Java.
Again, it gives you the real
professional quality digital
media capabilities from Java,
and in fact allows those class
files to be used verbatim
on either Windows or Mac.
There's nothing proprietary or special
that we're doing to make this work.
and there's a quick time for
Java talk actually right after this
one that'll probably be a really
nice talk for you to attend in A2.
The Swing integration we've done
is pretty unique in that many of
the platform look and feels that
are done with Swing are emulated.
That means they don't interact
with the native system at all.
They try and emulate the look and feel.
What happens there, as you can imagine,
is when the look and feel changes,
you have to then re-emulate or end
up having the wrong look and feel.
In addition to changes,
sometimes you just get it wrong
because you didn't really understand
what the native look and feel was.
There's a whole class of bugs that
usually crop up around emulation.
What we're doing is integrating
directly with the appearance manager.
The Aqua look and feel you saw on
stage in the WebObjects demo with
Swing was a Swing application that was,
again,
written directly to appearance manager.
The Java programmer didn't know
anything about the integration.
It just happened automagically.
We also do the correct menu placement.
[Transcript missing]
Now that Java is fairly fast,
and I think it shows that that demo,
again, that's a large application,
the performance of it is fairly good.
So the only problem, so to speak,
with that app is it didn't
have the Aqua look and feel.
So I'm going to bring Blake up
briefly to show you that.
: What we're going to do is have
a quick look at the fact that
JBuilder was designed from the
beginning to be look and feel aware.
So when we go to choose IDE options,
it gives us the ability,
among other things, to switch between the
installed look and feel.
So here the Mac OS adaptive look and feel
is just one of the ones that shows up.
So once we pick that and hit OK,
we'll see that we get
the Aqua look and feel.
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
So actually, I have these boring --
these will seem boring now.
But that's good.
So you can see --
What did I do?
Oh, I hit, okay.
So, you can see switching back and forth.
It's almost like, well,
let's go to the next one.
Here's a, it's called Metal.
It's the built-in Java look and feel.
And when you switch to Aqua,
it's almost like it comes to life.
It's just so much prettier.
Right.
So, unfortunately, some of this cool
Aqua integration isn't in DP4,
so you guys won't be able
to play with it for DP4.
Sorry about that.
We actually hope to do a net
release in between now and GM,
where you can get some of this stuff
from us before we actually go GM.
We're going to improve our
project builder support for Java.
I think I mentioned that.
We're going to a new
application embedding model.
The main folks who care
about this are like OmniWeb,
the Internet Explorer folks.
That's how you embed a VM and
an applet within an application.
But you may have an application that
wants to embed this stuff within you.
If so, then you'll have this application
embedding model that we're doing.
Wow, closing thoughts.
We have how many minutes?
We have four minutes left.
I guess what's getting fun now
is we have a team that's kicking
some serious butt on this stuff,
and there's real applications that are
starting to get exciting like Velocity,
like Oracle's apps, like this beautiful
IDE that Enprise has done.
Fundamentally, that's what we do.
There's no way to look at Java by
itself and say it's great.
You have to look at the applications
that are going to be produced on
top of it and say they're great.
If in fact they're great,
then we're happy and we
know we're doing a good job.
I have two or three minutes left.
I'd like to bring the team up and
give them a round of applause.